# Chapter 8

Let this suffice for benevolence and the opposite. We will now state what things and persons excite pity, and the state of mind of those who feel
it. Let pity then be a kind of pain excited by the sight of evil, deadly or painful, which befalls one who does not deserve it; an evil which one
might expect to come upon himself or one of his friends, and when it seems near. For it is evident that one who is likely to feel pity must be such
as to think that he, or one of his friends, is liable to suffer some evil, and such an evil as has been stated in the definition, or one similar, or
nearly similar. Wherefore neither those who are utterly ruined, are capable of pity, for they think they have nothing more to suffer, since they
have exhausted suffering; nor those who think themselves supremely fortunate, who rather are insolent. For if they think that all good things are
theirs, it is clear that they think that they cannot possibly suffer evil, and this is one of the good things. Now those persons who think they are
likely to suffer are those who have already suffered and escaped; the advanced in age, by reason of their wisdom and experience; and the weak, and
those who are rather more timid; and the educated, for they reckon rightly; and those who have parents, children, or wives, for these are part of
them and likely to suffer the evils of which we have spoken; and those who are not influenced by any courageous emotion, such as anger or
confidence, for these emotions do not take thought of the future and those who are not in a wantonly insolent frame of mind, for they also take no
thought of future suffering; but it is those who are between the two extremes that feel pity. Those who are not in great fear; for those who are
panic-stricken are incapable of pity, because they are preoccupied with their own emotion. And men feel pity if they think that some persons are
virtuous; for he who thinks that no one is will think that all deserve misfortune. And, generally speaking, a man is moved to pity when he is so
affected that he remembers that such evils have happened, or expects that they may happen, either to himself or to one of his friends.

We have stated the frame of mind which leads men to pity; and the things which arouse this feeling are clearly shown by the definition. They are all
painful and distressing things that are also destructive, and all that are ruinous; and all evils of which fortune is the cause, if they are great.
Things distressing and destructive are various kinds of death, personal ill-treatment and injuries, old age, disease, and lack of food. The evils
for which fortune is responsible are lack of friends, or few friends (wherefore it is pitiable to be torn away from friends and intimates),
ugliness, weakness, mutilation; if some misfortune comes to pass from a quarter whence one might have reasonably expected something good; and if
this happens often; and if good fortune does not come until a man has already suffered, as when the presents from the Great King were not dispatched
to Diopithes until he was dead. Those also are to be pitied to whom no good has ever accrued, or who are unable to enjoy it when it has.

These and the like things, then, excite pity.These and the like things, then, excite pity. The persons men pity are those whom they know, provided
they are not too closely connected with them for if they are, they feel the same as if they themselves were likely to suffer. This is why
Amasis [^^7_1] is said not to have wept when his son was led to execution, but did weep at the sight of a friend reduced to beggary, for the latter
excited pity, the former terror. The terrible is different from the pitiable, for it drives out pity, and often serves to produce the opposite
feeling. Further, the nearness of the terrible makes men pity. [^^7_2] Men also pity those who resemble them in age, character, habits, position, or
family; for all such relations make a man more likely to think that their misfortune may befall him as well. For, in general, here also we may
conclude that all that men fear in regard to themselves excites their pity when others are the victims. And since sufferings are pitiable when they
appear close at hand, while those that are past or future, ten thousand years backwards or forwards, either do not excite pity at all or only in a
less degree, because men neither expect the one nor remember the other, it follows that those who contribute to the effect by gestures, voice,
dress, and dramatic action generally, are more pitiable; for they make the evil appear close at hand, setting it before our eyes as either future or
past. And disasters that have just happened or are soon about to happen excite more pity for the same reason. Pity is also aroused by signs and
actions, such as the dress of those who have suffered, and all such objects, and the words and everything else that concerns those who are actually
suffering, for instance, at the point of death. And when men show themselves undaunted [^^7_3] at such critical times it is specially pitiable; for
all these things, [^^7_4] because they come immediately under our observation, increase the feeling of pity, both because the sufferer does not seem
to deserve his fate, and because the suffering is before our eyes.

{pagebreak}

[^^7_1]: Hdt. 3.14 , where the story is told, not of Amasis, by of his son Psammenitus.

[^^7_2]: Jebb renders: “Again men pity when the danger isJebb renders: “Again men pity when the danger is near themselves,” which may mean when they
see something terrible happening to others and likely soon to befall themselves. Vahlen inserts οὐ γὰρ before ἔτι : “for men cease to pity when the
terrible comes close to themselves.

[^^7_3]: “When the men, who are in such crises, are good men” (Jebb). If they were not,“When the men, who are in such crises, are good men” (Jebb).
If they were not, their misfortune would appear deserved.

[^^7_4]: The signs and actions, and the demeanor of the sufferer.The signs and actions, and the demeanor of the sufferer. 

