# Chapter 4: Topics of deliberative rhetoric

We must first ascertain about what kind of good or bad things the deliberative orator advises, since he cannot do so about everything, but only
about things which may possibly happen or not. Everything which of necessity either is or will be, or which cannot possibly be or come to pass, is
outside the scope of deliberation. Indeed, even in the case of things that are possible advice is not universally appropriate; for they include
certain advantages, natural and accidental, about which it is not worth while to offer advice. But it is clear that advice is limited to those
subjects about which we take counsel; and such are all those which can naturally be referred to ourselves and the first cause of whose origination
is in our own power; for our examination is limited to finding out whether such things are possible or impossible for us to perform.

However, there is no need at present to endeavor to enumerate with scrupulous exactness or to classify those subjects which men are wont to discuss,
or to define them as far as possible with strict accuracy, since this is not the function of the rhetorical art but of one that is more intelligent
and exact, and further, more than its legitimate subjects of inquiry have already been assigned to it. For what we have said before is
true [^^3_1] : that Rhetoric is composed of analytical science and of that branch of political science which is concerned with Ethics, and that it
resembles partly Dialectic and partly sophistical arguments. But in proportion as anyone endeavors to make of Dialectic or Rhetoric, not what they
are, faculties, but sciences, to that extent he will, without knowing it, destroy their real nature, in thus altering their character, by crossing
over into the domain of sciences [^^3_2] , whose subjects are certain definite things, not merely words. Nevertheless, even at present we may
mention such matters as it is worthwhile to analyze, while still leaving much for political science to investigate.

Now, we may say that the most important subjects about which all men deliberate and deliberative orators harangue, are five in number, to
wit: ways and means, war and peace, the defence of the country, imports and exports, legislation.

Accordingly, the orator who is going to give advice on ways and means should be acquainted with the nature and extent of the State resources, so
that if any is omitted it may be added, and if any is insufficient, it may be increased. Further, he should know all the expenses of the State, that
if any is superfluous, it may be removed, or, if too great, may be curtailed. For men become wealthier, not only by adding to what they already
possess, but also by cutting down expenses. Of these things it is not only possible to acquire a general view from individual experience, but in
view of advising concerning them it is further necessary to be well informed about what has been discovered among others.

In regard to war and peace, the orator should be acquainted with the power of the State, how great it is already and how great it may possibly
become; of what kind it is already and what additions may possibly be made to it; further, what wars it has waged and its conduct of them. These
things he should be acquainted with, not only as far as his own State is concerned, but also in reference to neighboring States, and particularly
those with whom there is a likelihood of war, so that towards the stronger a pacific attitude may be maintained, and in regard to the weaker, the
decision as to making war on them may be left to his own State. Again, he should know whether their forces are like or unlike his own, for herein
also advantage or disadvantage may lie. With reference to these matters he must also have examined the results, not only of the wars carried on by
his own State, but also of those carried on by others; for similar results naturally arise from similar causes.

Again, in regard to the defense of the country, he should not be ignorant how it is carried on; he should know both the strength of the guard, its
character, and the positions of the guard-houses (which is impossible for one who is unacquainted with the country), so that if any guard is
insufficient it may be increased, or if any is superfluous it may be disbanded, and greater attention devoted to suitable positions.

Again, in regard to food, he should know what amount of expenditure is sufficient to support the State; what kind of food is produced at home or can
be imported; and what exports and imports are necessary, in order that contracts and agreements may be made with those [^^3_3] who can furnish them;
for it is necessary to keep the citizens free from reproach in their relations with two classes of people—those who are stronger and those who are
useful for commercial purposes.

With a view to the safety of the State, it is necessary that the orator should be able to judge of all these questions, but an understanding of
legislation is of special importance, for it is on the laws that the safety of the State is based. Wherefore he must know how many forms of
government there are; what is expedient for each; and the natural causes of its downfall, whether they are peculiar to the particular form of
government or opposed to it. By being ruined by causes peculiar to itself, I mean that, with the exception of the perfect form of government, all
the rest are ruined by being relaxed or strained to excess. Thus democracy, not only when relaxed, but also when strained to excess, becomes weaker
and will end in an oligarchy; similarly, not only does an aquiline or snub nose reach the mean, when one of these defects is relaxed, but when it
becomes aquiline or snub to excess, it is altered to such an extent that even the likeness of a nose is lost. Moreover, with reference to acts of
legislation, it is useful not only to understand what form of government is expedient by judging in the light of the past, but also to become
acquainted with those in existence in other nations, and to learn what kinds of government are suitable to what kinds of people. It is clear,
therefore, that for legislation books of travel are useful, since they help us to understand the laws of other nations, and for political debates
historical works. [^^3_4] All these things, however, belong to Politics and not to Rhetoric.

Such, then, are the most important questions upon which the would-be deliberative orator must be well informed. Now let us again state the
sources whence we must derive our arguments for exhortation or discussion on these and other questions.

{pagebreak}

[^^3_1]: The analytical science is Dialectic, incorrectly regarded as a branch of Analytics, which properly implies scientific demonstration.

[^^3_2]: Taking `εἰς ἐπιστήμας` with `μεταβαίνειν`. If taken with `ἐπισκευάζων`, the sense will be: “by changing his ground ( `μεταβαίνειν` being
used absolutely) while altering their characters from faculties to sciences.”

[^^3_3]: `τούτους`: those who will receive exports and send imports.

[^^3_4]: This rendering, although convenient, hardly represents the Greek, which, literally translated, is *“the investigations of those who 
write about human actions”* (cf. `ἱστορικός` , 4.8). 

