# Chapter 3

Frigidity of style arises from four causes: first, the use of compound words, as when Lycophron [^^2_1] speaks of the “many-faced sky of the
mighty-topped earth,” “narrow-passaged shore”; and Gorgias of “a begging-poet flatterer,” “those who commit perjury and those who swear right
solemnly. [^^2_2] ” And as Alcidamas says, “the soul full of anger and the face fire-colored,” “he thought that their zeal would be
end-accomplishing,” “he made persuasive words end-accomplishing,” and “the azure-colored floor of the sea,” for all these appear poetical because
they are compound.

This is one cause of frigidity; another is the use of strange words; as Lycophron calls Xerxes “a monster of a man,” Sciron “a human
scourge [^^2_3] ”; and Alcidamas says “plaything in po etry,” “the audaciousness of nature,” “whetted with unmitigated wrath of thought.”

A third cause is the use of epithets that are either long or unseasonable or too crowded; thus, in poetry it is appropriate to speak of white milk,
but in prose it is less so; and if epithets are employed to excess, they reveal the art and make it evident that it is poetry. And yet such may be
used to a certain extent, since it removes the style from the ordinary and gives a “foreign” air. But one must aim at the mean, for neglect to do so
does more harm than speaking at random; for a random style lacks merit, but excess is vicious. That is why the style of Alcidamas appears frigid;
for he uses epithets not as a seasoning but as a regular dish, so crowded, so long, and so glaring are they. For instance, he does not say “sweat”
but “damp sweat”; not “to the Isthmian games” but “to the solemn assembly of the Isthmian games”; not “laws”, but “the laws, the rulers of states”;
not “running”, but “with a race-like impulse of the soul”; not “museum”, but “having taken up the museum of nature” [^^2_4] ; and “the scowling
anxiety of the soul”; “creator”, not “of favor”, but “all-popular favor”; and “dispenser of the pleasure of the hearers”; “he hid,” not “with
branches,” but “with the branches of the forest”; “he covered,” not “his body,” but “the nakedness of his body.” He also calls desire
“counter-initiative of the soul”—an expression which is at once compound and an epithet, so that it becomes poetry—and “the excess of his depravity
so beyond all bounds.” Hence those who employ poetic language by their lack of taste make the style ridiculous and frigid, and such idle chatter
produces obscurity; for when words are piled upon one who already knows, it destroys perspicuity by a cloud of verbiage. People use compound words,
when a thing has no name and the word is easy to combine, as χρονοτριβεῖν , to pass time; but if the practice is abused, the style becomes entirely
poetical. This is why compound words are especially employed by dithyrambic poets, who are full of noise; strange words by epic poets, for they
imply dignity and self-assertion; metaphor to writers of iambics, who now employ them, as we have stated.

The fourth cause of frigidity of style is to be found in metaphors; for metaphors also are inappropriate, some because they are ridiculous—for the
comic poets also employ them—others because they are too dignified and somewhat tragic; and if they are farfetched, they are obscure, as when
Gorgias says: “Affairs pale and bloodless” [^^2_5] ; “you have sown shame and reaped misfortune”; for this is too much like poetry. And as Alcidamas
calls philosophy “a bulwark of the laws,” [^^2_6] and the Odyssey “a beautiful mirror of human life,” and “introducing no such plaything in poetry.”
All these expressions fail to produce persuasion, for the reasons stated. As for what Gorgias said to the swallow which, flying over his head, let
fall her droppings upon him, it was in the best tragic style. He exclaimed, “Fie, for shame, Philomela!”; for there would have been nothing in this
act disgraceful for a bird, whereas it would have been for a young lady. The reproach therefore was appropriate, addressing her as she was, not as
she is.

{pagebreak}

[^^2_1]: A sophist, not the poet (author of the obscureA sophist, not the poet (author of the obscure Alexander or Cassandra ), who was later than
Aristotle.

[^^2_2]: Lobeck conjecturedLobeck conjectured κατεπιορκήσαντας , “who commit out-and-out perjury.”

[^^2_3]: Sciron and Sinnis were both robbers slain by Theseus, bySciron and Sinnis were both robbers slain by Theseus, by Lycophron turns Sinnis
into a γλῶττα , using it adjectivally = “destructive”; cf. σῖνος , “harm”; σίντης = σίννις .

[^^2_4]: The meaning ofThe meaning of παραλαβών is quite obscure: various renderings are “having taken to himself,” “received,” “grasped,”
“inherited.” The word μουσεῖον , originally a haunt of the Muses, came to mean a school of art or literature. The fault appears to consist in the
addition of τῆς φύσεως , but it is difficult to see why. Cope confesses his inability to understand the passage. Jebb translates: “he does not say,
‘having taken to himself a school of the Muses,’ but ‘to Nature's school of the Muses.’”

[^^2_5]: On this passage ThompsonOn this passage Thompson ( Gorgias , p. 179) says: “The metaphor of reaping and sowing is a mere commonplace . . .
but ‘pallid and bloodless affairs’ is a phrase which would need apology even from a modern.” On the other hand, it is difficult to see what
objection there is to calling the Odyssey “a beautiful mirror of human life.” Another reading is ἔναιμα , which Cope translates “events fresh with
the blood in them.” If the two extracts are taken together, it is suggested (apparently by the editor of Cope's notes) that the sense may be:
“things green and unripe (flushed with sap), and this was the crop which you . . .,” the adjectives referring to green and unripe stalks of corn.

[^^2_6]: Or, “a barrier against the laws.” This is the general meaning ofOr, “a barrier against the laws.” This is the general meaning of
ἐπιτείχισμα , a border fortress commanding an enemy's country. 

