# Chapter 24

But as it is possible that some syllogisms may be real, and others not real but only apparent, there must also be real and apparent enthymemes,
since the enthymeme is a kind of syllogism.

Now, of the topics of apparent enthymemes one is that of diction, which is of two kinds. The first, as in Dialectic, consists in ending with a
conclusion syllogistically expressed, although there has been no syllogistic process, “therefore it is neither this nor that,” “so it must be this
or that”; and similarly in rhetorical arguments a concise and antithetical statement is supposed to be an enthymeme; for such a style appears to
contain a real enthymeme. This fallacy appears to be the result of the form of expression. For the purpose of using the diction to create an
impression of syllogistic reasoning it is useful to state the heads of several syllogisms: “He saved some, avenged others, and freed the
Greeks”; [^^23_1] for each of these propositions has been proved by others, but their union appears to furnish a fresh conclusion.

The second kind of fallacy of diction is homonymy.The second kind of fallacy of diction is homonymy. [^^23_2] For instance, if one were to say that
the mouse is an important animal, since from it is derived the most honored of all religious festivals, namely, the mysteries [^^23_3] ; or if, in
praising the dog, one were to include the dog in heaven （Sirius), or Pan, because Pindar said, [^^23_4] O blessed one, whom the Olympians call dog
of the Great Mother, taking every form, or were to say that the dog is an honorable animal, since to be without a dog is most dishonorable. And to
say that Hermes is the most sociable of the gods, because he alone is called common; [^^23_5] and that words are most excellent, since good men are
considered worthy, not of riches but of consideration; for λόγου ἄξιος has a double meaning. [^^23_6]

Another fallacy consists in combining what is divided or dividing what is combined. For since a thing which is not the same as another often appears
to be the same, one may adopt the more convenient alternative. Such was the argument of Euthydemus, to prove, for example, that a man knows that
there is a trireme in the Piraeus , because he knows the existence of two things, the Piraeus and the trireme; [^^23_7] or that, when one knows the
letters, one also knows the word made of them, for word and letters are the same thing. Further, since twice so much is unwholesome, one may argue
that neither is the original amount wholesome; for it would be absurd that two halves separately should be good, but bad combined. In this way the
argument may be used for refutation, in another way for demonstration, if one were to say, one good thing cannot make two bad things. But the whole
topic is fallacious. Again, one may quote what Polycrates said of Thrasybulus, that he deposed thirty tyrants, [^^23_8] for here he combines them;
or the example of the fallacy of division in the Orestes of Theodectes: [^^23_9] “It is just that a woman who has killed her husband” should be put
to death, and that the son should avenge the father; and this in fact is what has been done. But if they are combined, perhaps the act ceases to be
just. The same might also be classed as an example of the fallacy of omission; for the name of the one who should put the woman to death is not
mentioned.

Another topic is that of constructing or destroying by exaggeration, which takes place when the speaker, without having proved that any crime has
actually been committed, exaggerates the supposed fact; for it makes it appear either that the accused is not guilty, when he himself exaggerates
it, or that he is guilty, when it is the accuser who is in a rage. Therefore there is no enthymeme; for the hearer falsely concludes that the
accused is guilty or not, although neither has been proved.

Another fallacy is that of the sign, for this argument also is illogical. For instance, if one were to say that those who love one another are
useful to States, since the love of Harmodius and Aristogiton overthrew the tyrant Hipparchus; or that Dionysius is a thief, because he is a rascal;
for here again the argument is inconclusive; not every rascal is a thief although every thief is a rascal.

Another fallacy is derived from accident; for instance, when Polycrates says of the mice, that, they rendered great service by gnawing the
bowstrings. [^^23_10] Or if one were to say that nothing is more honorable than to be invited to a dinner, for because he was not invited Achilles
was angry with the Achaeans at Tenedos ; whereas he was really angry because he had been treated with disrespect, but this was an accident due to
his not having been invited. [^^23_11]

Another fallacy is that of the Consequence. [^^23_12] For instance, in the Alexander Paris it is said that Paris was high-minded, because he
despised the companionship of the common herd and dwelt on Ida by himself; for because the high-minded are of this character, Paris also might be
thought high-minded. Or, since a man pays attention to dress and roams about at night, he is a libertine, because libertines are of this character.
Similarly, the poor sing and dance in the temples, exiles can live where they please; and since these things belong to those who are apparently
happy, those to whom they belong may also be thought happy. But there is a difference in conditions; [^^23_13] wherefore this topic also falls under
the head of omission.

Another fallacy consists of taking what is not the cause for the cause, as when a thing has happened at the same time as, or after, another; for it
is believed that what happens after is produced by the other, especially by politicians. Thus, Demades declared that the policy of Demosthenes was
the cause of all the evils that happened, since it was followed by the war.

Another fallacy is the omission of when and how. For instance, Alexander Paris had a right to carry off Helen, for the choice of a husband had been
given her by her father. But （this was a fallacy), for it was not, as might be thought, for all time, but only for the first time; for the father's
authority only lasts till then. Or, if one should say that it is wanton outrage to beat a free man; for this is not always the case, but only when
the assailant gives the first blow.

Further, as in sophistical disputations, an apparent syllogism arises as the result of considering a thing first absolutely, and then not
absolutely, but only in a particular case. For instance, in Dialectic, it is argued that that which is not is , for that which is not is that which
is not [^^23_14] ; also, that the unknown can be known, for it can be known of the unknown that it is unknown. Similarly, in Rhetoric, an apparent
enthymeme may arise from that which is not absolutely probable but only in particular cases. But this is not to be understood absolutely, as Agathon
says: One might perhaps say that this very thing is probable, that many things happen to men that are not probable; for that which is contrary to
probability nevertheless does happen, so that that which is contrary to probability is probable. If this is so, that which is improbable will be
probable. But not absolutely; but as, in the case of sophistical disputations, the argument becomes fallacious when the circumstances, reference,
and manner are not added, so here it will become so owing to the probability being not probable absolutely but only in particular cases. The “Art”
of Corax is composed of this topic. For if a man is not likely to be guilty of what he is accused of, for instance if, being weak, he is accused of
assault and battery, his defence will be that the crime is not probable; but if he is likely to be guilty, for instance, if he is strong, it may be
argued again that the crime is not probable, for the very reason that it was bound to appear so. It is the same in all other cases; for a man must
either be likely to have committed a crime or not. Here, both the alternatives appear equally probable, but the one is really so, the other not
probable absolutely, but only in the conditions mentioned. And this is what “making the worse appear the better argument” means. Wherefore men were
justly disgusted with the promise of Protagoras [^^23_15] ; for it is a lie, not a real but an apparent probability, not found in any art except
Rhetoric and Sophistic. So much for real or apparent enthymemes.

{pagebreak}

[^^23_1]: Isoc. 9.65-69 .

[^^23_2]: Or equivocation, in which a single term has a doubleOr equivocation, in which a single term has a double meaning.

[^^23_3]: DerivingDeriving μυστήρια （ μύειν , to close the lips) from μῦς （mouse).

[^^23_4]: A fragment from theA fragment from the Parthenia （songs sung by maidens to the accompaniment of the flute). Pan is called “the dog of
Cybele,” the great nature-goddess of the Greeks, as being always in attendance on her, being himself a nature-god. The fact that Pindar calls Pan
“dog” is taken as a glorification of that animal.

[^^23_5]: κοινὸς Ε῾ρμῆς is an expression meaning “halves!” When anyone had a stroke of luck, such as finding a purse full of money in the street,
anyone with him expected to go halves. Hermes was the god of luck, and such a find was called ἑρμαῖον. κοινωνικός is taken to mean （1) liberal to
others, or （2) sociable.

[^^23_6]: λόγος : （1) speech; （2) account, esteem.

[^^23_7]: Very obscure and no explanation is satisfactory. The parallel passage inVery obscure and no explanation is satisfactory. The parallel
passage in Aristot. Sophist. Elenchi 20.6 is: “Do you being in Sicily now know that there are triremes in the Piraeus ?” The ambiguity lies in the
position of “now,” whether it is to be taken with “in Sicily ” or with “in the Piraeus .” At the moment when a man is in Sicily he cannot know that
there are at this time triremes in the Piraeus ; but being in Sicily he can certainly know of the ships in the Piraeus , which should be there, but
are now in Sicily （Kirchmann). St. Hilaire suggests that the two clauses are: Do you now, being in Sicily , see the triremes which are in the
Piraeus ? and, Did you when in Sicily , see the triremes which are now in the Piraeus ? The fallacy consists in the two facts （being in the Piraeus
and the existence of triremes in Sicily ), true separately, being untrue combined.

[^^23_8]: Thrasybulus deposed the thirty individuals and put down theThrasybulus deposed the thirty individuals and put down the single tyranny
which they composed; he then claimed a thirtyfold reward, as having put down thirty tyrannies.

[^^23_9]: Frag. 5 （Frag. 5 （ T.G.F. ).

[^^23_10]: Hdt. 2.141 . The story was that, when Sennacherib invaded Egypt , a host of field-mice devoured all the quivers, bowstrings and leather
shield-holders of the Assyrians. Apollo was called Smintheus （ σμίνθος , mouse) and was represented on coins with a mouse in his hand, either as the
mouse-slayer and protector of crops, or because the animal was sacred to him. The story, alluded to elsewhere, was of Greek, not of Egyptian origin.
Similar panegyrics on ridiculous things or animals included pots, counters, salt, flies, bees, and such subjects as death, sleep, and food.

[^^23_11]: Sophocles,Sophocles, The Gathering of the Greeks （ T.G.F. p. 161), a satyric drama. His not being invited was a mere accident of the
disrespect.

[^^23_12]: Assuming a proposition to be convertible, when it is not; it does not follow, assuming that all the high-minded dwell byAssuming a
proposition to be convertible, when it is not; it does not follow, assuming that all the high-minded dwell by themselves, that all who dwell by
themselves are highminded.

[^^23_13]: The poor want to get money; the rich dance and sing to amuse themselves, or to show that they can do as they like. ExilesThe poor want to
get money; the rich dance and sing to amuse themselves, or to show that they can do as they like. Exiles can certainly live where they like in a
foreign land, but would prefer to live in their own country; the rich, who are not exiles, travel to amuse themselves.

[^^23_14]: The first “is” means “has a real, absoluteThe first “is” means “has a real, absolute existence”; the second “is” merely expresses the
identity of the terms of the proposition, and is particular; but the sophistical reasoner takes it in the same sense as the first. The same applies
to the argument about the unknown.

[^^23_15]: This utterance of Protagoras gave particular offense as apparently implying that the weakerThis utterance of Protagoras gave particular
offense as apparently implying that the weaker cause was really identical with the worse, so that to support it was to support injustice. But,
considering the high moral character ascribed to Protagoras, it seems more probable to take the formula as a statement of the aim of all ancient
orators—how to overcome stronger arguments by arguments weaker in themselves. 

