# Chapter 13

A speech has two parts. It is necessary to state the subject, and then to prove it. Wherefore it is impossible to make a statement without proving
it, or to prove it without first putting it forward; for both he who proves proves something, and he who puts something forward does so in order to
prove it. The first of these parts is the statement of the case, the second the proof, a similar division to that of problem and demonstration. But
the division now generally made is absurd; for narrative only belongs in a manner to forensic speech, but in epideictic or deliberative speech how
is it possible that there should be narrative as it is defined, or a refutation; or an epilogue in demonstrative speeches? [^^12_1] In deliberative
speeches, again, exordium, comparison, and recapitulation are only admissible when there is a conflict of opinion. For both accusation and defence
are often found in deliberative, but not qua deliberative speech. And further, the epilogue does not even belong to every forensic speech, for
instance, when it is short, or the matter is easy to recollect; for in the epilogue what happens is that there is a reduction of length. [^^12_2]

So then the necessary parts of a speech are the statement of the case and proof. These divisions are appropriate to every speech, and at the most
the parts are four in number—exordium, statement, proof, epilogue; for refutation of an opponent is part of the proofs, and comparison is an
amplification of one's own case, and therefore also part of the proofs; for he who does this proves something, whereas the exordium and the epilogue
are merely aids to memory. Therefore, if we adopt all such divisions we shall be following Theodorus [^^12_3] and his school, who distinguished
narrative, additional narrative, and preliminary narrative, refutation and additional refutation. But one must only adopt a name to express a
distinct species or a real difference; otherwise, it becomes empty and silly, like the terms introduced by Licymnius in his “Art,” where he speaks
of “being wafted along,” “wandering from the subject,” [^^12_4] and “ramifications.”

{pagebreak}

[^^12_1]: The generally accepted divisions are:The generally accepted divisions are: προοίμιον （exordium), διήγησις （narrative), πίστις （proof),
ἐπίλογος （peroration). （ διήγησις is a species of πρόθεσις , which is used instead of it just before.) Aristotle objects that it is （as a rule) only
the forensic speech which requires a regular διήγησις , a full and detailed statement of what has happened before. In epideictic and demonstrative
（deliberative) speeches, the object of which is to prove something, there is no need of another existing division called the refutation of the
adversary, and in the demonstrative there can be no room for an epilogue, which is not a summary of proofs and arguments . Thus the necessary
divisions of a speech are really only two; πρόθεσις and πίστις , or at most four.

[^^12_2]: i.e. its use is to recall the main facts briefly （sect. 4 end),i.e. its use is to recall the main facts briefly （sect. 4 end), which in a
short speech is needless.

[^^12_3]: Plat. Phaedrus 266d , where the additional kinds of narrative are omitted, and their place taken by πίστωσις and ἐπιπίστωσις （confirmation
of the proof).

[^^12_4]: Or, “diverting the judge's attention.”Or, “diverting the judge's attention.” 

