# Chapter 1

Such then are the materials which we must employ in exhorting and dissuading, praising and blaming, accusing and defending, and such are the
opinions and propositions that are useful to produce conviction in these circumstances; for they are the subject and source of enthymemes, which are
specially suitable to each class (so to say) of speeches. [^^0_1] But since the object of Rhetoric is judgement—for judgements are pronounced in
deliberative rhetoric and judicial proceedings are a judgement—it is not only necessary to consider how to make the speech itself demonstrative and
convincing, but also that the speaker should show himself to be of a certain character and should know how to put the judge into a certain frame of
mind. For it makes a great difference with regard to producing conviction—especially in demonstrative, and, next to this, in forensic oratory—that
the speaker should show himself to be possessed of certain qualities and that his hearers should think that he is disposed in a certain way towards
them; and further, that they themselves should be disposed in a certain way towards him. [^^0_2] In deliberative oratory, it is more useful that the
orator should appear to be of a certain character, in forensic, that the hearer should be disposed in a certain way; for opinions vary, according as
men love or hate, are wrathful or mild, and things appear either altogether different, or different in degree; for when a man is favorably disposed
towards one on whom he is passing judgement, he either thinks that the accused has committed no wrong at all or that his offence is trifling; but if
he hates him, the reverse is the case. And if a man desires anything and has good hopes of getting it, if what is to come is pleasant, he thinks
that it is sure to come to pass and will be good; but if a man is unemotional or not hopeful [^^0_3] it is quite the reverse.

For the orator to produce conviction three qualities are necessary; for, independently of demonstrations, the things which induce belief are three
in number. These qualities are good sense, virtue, and goodwill; for speakers are wrong both in what they say and in the advice they give, because
they lack either all three or one of them. For either through want of sense they form incorrect opinions, or, if their opinions are correct, through
viciousness they do not say what they think, or, if they are sensible and good, [^^0_4] they lack goodwill; wherefore it may happen that they do not
give the best advice, although they know what it is. These qualities are all that are necessary, so that the speaker who appears to possess all
three will necessarily convince his hearers. The means whereby he may appear sensible and good [^^0_5] must be inferred from the classification of
the virtues; [^^0_6] for to make himself appear such he would employ the same means as he would in the case of others. We must now speak of goodwill
and friendship in our discussion of the emotions.

The emotions are all those affections which cause men to change their opinion in regard to their judgements, and are accompanied by pleasure and
pain; such are anger, pity, fear, and all similar emotions and their contraries. And each of them must be divided under three heads; for instance,
in regard to anger, the disposition of mind which makes men angry, the persons with whom they are usually angry, and the occasions which give rise
to anger. For if we knew one or even two of these heads, but not all three, it would be impossible to arouse that emotion. The same applies to the
rest. Just as, then, we have given a list of propositions [^^0_7] in what we have previously said, we will do the same here and divide the emotions
in the same manner.

{pagebreak}

[^^0_1]: This is Cope's interpretation. Jebb renders: “If we take each branch of Rhetoric by itself.” TheThis is Cope's interpretation. Jebb
renders: “If we take each branch of Rhetoric by itself.” The classes are of course the deliberative, forensic, and epideictic.

[^^0_2]: The instructions given for enthymematic or logical proof should suffice; butThe instructions given for enthymematic or logical proof should
suffice; but since the function of Rhetoric is to find the available means of persuasion and its end is a judgement; and since an appeal to the
speaker's own character and to the passions of those who are to give the judgement is bound to carry great weight, the speaker must be provided with
rules for ethical and “pathetic” (emotional) proofs. In Book 1.5 Aristotle mentions appeals to the emotions with disapproval, but this does not
apply to all such appeals, but only to those which are likely to bias the judges unfairly (e.g. stirring up envy, hatred, a desire for revenge).

[^^0_3]: Opposed toOpposed to εὐέλπιδι . Others render “in a bad humor.”

[^^0_4]: ἐπιεικής and σπουδαῖος both = ἀγαθός . In a restricted sense ἐπιεικής is “respectable,” σπουδαῖος “serious.”

[^^0_5]: See previous note.See previous note.

[^^0_6]: Book 1.9.Book 1.9.

[^^0_7]: In Book 1 generally (cp. 1.2.22).In Book 1 generally (cp. 1.2.22). 

