# Chapter 19

The epilogue is composed of four parts: to dispose the hearer favorably towards oneself and unfavorably towards the adversary; to amplify and
depreciate; to excite the emotions of the hearer; to recapitulate. For after you have proved that you are truthful and that the adversary is false,
the natural order of things is to praise ourselves, blame him, and put the finishing touches. [^^18_1] One of two things should be aimed at, to show
that you are either relatively or absolutely good and the adversary either relatively or absolutely bad. The topics which serve to represent men as
good or bad have already been stated. [^^18_2] After this, when the proof has once been established, the natural thing is to amplify or depreciate;
for it is necessary that the facts should be admitted, if it is intended to deal with the question of degree; just as the growth of the body is due
to things previously existing. The topics of amplification and depreciation have been previously set forth. [^^18_3] Next, when the nature and
importance of the facts are clear, one should rouse the hearer to certain emotions—pity, indignation, anger, hate, jealousy, emulation, and
quarrelsomeness. The topics of these also have been previously stated, [^^18_4] so that all that remains is to recapitulate what has been said. This
may appropriately be done at this stage in the way certain rhetoricians wrongly recommend for the exordium, when they advise frequent repetition of
the points, so that they may be easily learnt. In the exordium we should state the subject, in order that the question to be decided may not escape
notice, but in the epilogue we should give a summary statement of the proofs.

We should begin by saying that we have kept our promise, and then state what we have said and why. Our case may also be closely compared with our
opponent's; and we may either compare what both of us have said on the same point, or without direct comparison: “My opponent said so-and-so, and I
said so-and-so on this point and for these reasons.” Or ironically, as for instance, “He said this and I answered that; what would he have done, if
he had proved this, and not simply that?” Or by interrogation: “What is there that has not been proved?” or, “What has my opponent proved?” We may,
therefore, either sum up by comparison, or in the natural order of the statements, just as they were made, our own first, and then again,
separately, if we so desire, what has been said by our opponent. To the conclusion of the speech [^^18_5] the most appropriate style is that which
has no connecting particles, in order that it may be a peroration, but not an oration: “I have spoken; you have heard; you know the facts; now give
your decision.” [^^18_6]

{pagebreak}

[^^18_1]: Or, “mould the hearers to one's will”Or, “mould the hearers to one's will” （L. and S.).

[^^18_2]: Book 1.9.Book 1.9.

[^^18_3]: Book 2.19.Book 2.19.

[^^18_4]: Book 2.1-11.Book 2.1-11.

[^^18_5]: ReadingReading τελευτῇ , a conjecture of Victorius. With τελευτή , the sense will be: “as a conclusion, the asyndectic style is
appropriate.”

[^^18_6]: It is generally supposed that this example of a suitableIt is generally supposed that this example of a suitable peroration is an echo of
the conclusion of the speech of Lysias Against Eratosthenes . 

